README.md, before:

# moosezmachine

moosezmachine is a Python 3 implementation of a Z-Machine (Z-code interpreter) based off the Z-Machine Standards Document version 1.1 (http://inform-fiction.org/zmachine/standards/z1point1/sect03.html)

moosezmachine needs at least Python 3.4 to work.

This project is a reference implementation -- no effort has been put into optimizations. 

Currently it only handles zcode versions 1 through 3. 

For simplicity, the unicode mappings map to textual equivalents (per 3.8.5.4.1)

## Usage

Moosezmachine provides two methods of playing a story file.

- The slack client, in slack_terp
- terp.py, a curses-based interpreter

### Terp.py

NOTE: terp.py was written to help build the core interpreter. There are a wide range of better interpreters available that I would recommend using if the main goal is to play games. If you're curious about how interpreters work, though, it provides a great starting point.

To play a story file using terp.py:

python3 terp.py path_to_file

This default setup will save/load files to the /tmp directory.

Options:
* --transcript_path to indicate a transcript file AND activate the transcript in game. If this option is on a commands log will also be created, at transcript_path with ".commands" appended
* --save_path to indicate the directory to save/restore files from
# --command_path to indicate a commands source file. If provided, the contents of this file will be used as text input until the end of file is reached, then control will be returned to the player

Debugging options
# --seed to set a seed for the random number generator
# --trace to set a path to a file to dump all zcode instructions to on quit

### Slack Terp

### Debugging tools and testing

* tests.py: run python3 tests.py to run all the unit/integration tests
* story_tests.py: run as python3 story_tests.py path_to_test_directory. When run, will look at the provided directory for all .z3 files. It will then ensure each of those files also have a .out and a .command file (eg, test.z3 will need test.out and test.commands). It will then run the interpreter using the provided story file, feeding in the commands, and verifying that the output matches the output file.
* debug.py, a curses-based interpreter with some debugging features. This is not a fully implementeted interpreter, and is not recommended for playing games.
* dump.py will dump assorted information about a story file. Usage is python3 dump.py --file path_to_story. Call it without parameters to see some of the options


## Architecture

Moosezmachine includes a number of interpreters for various purposes (command line, testing, etc). They all work in the following basic way:

The core object is the Interpreter (in zmachine.interpreter). This object acts as the virtual machine for the ZCode in the story file.

To initialize an Interpreter, you ned:
- A zmachine.interpreter.Story. This is intialized with the bytes from the the target story file 
- A zmachine.interpreter.OutputStreams object. This is initialized with zmachine.interpreter.OutputStream handlers for streams 1,2, and 4
  - Stream 1 is the normal output stream (the screen)
  - Stream 2 is the transcript stream
  - Stream 4 is a special stream that only records the player's commands
  - Stream 3 is a special memory-only stream that is not explicitly provided as a handler
- A zmachine.interpreter.InputStreams object. This is initialized with zmachine.interpreter.InputStream handlers for streams 1-2.
  - Stream 1 is the normal input stream (keyboard)
  - Stream 2 is a list of commands
- A zmachine.interpreter.SaveHandler
- A zmachine.interpreter.RestoreHandler

To initialize, call reset() on the interpreter object. This will initialize the game from the story file data, and throw an exception if the data is invalid in some way.

The interpreter does nothing on its own. To run the instruction at the current program counter, call interpreter.step(). This will run the instruction and change any internal state. 

The internal state will be one of:

- Interpreter.RUNNING_STATE: can call step to run next instruction
- Interpreter.WAITING_FOR_LINE_STATE: waiting for the next command.

If the state is WAITING_FOR_LINE_STATE, calling step() will call readline() on the interpreters InputStreams. If it returns anything but None, the intepreter will tokenize and process the command and set the state to RUNNING_STATE again.

After each step, interpreter.last_instruction will bet set to a textual description of the previous instruction for debugging purposes.

### Input

Versions of ZCode 4 and after allow for reading individual characters from the input stream. Moosezmachine sticks with verisons 3 and less and treats input as entirely modal.

An input stream needs only to implement a zero-parameter function, readline(). This should return None if no input is ready, or the input text if it has been completed.

### Output

An output stream needs to implement three functions:

- new_line: send output to the next line
- print_str(str): handle output of a string of unicode text. This may or may not have newline characterse in it.
- show_status(room_name, score_mode=True,hours=0,minutes=0, score=0,turns=0): display the status bar with the provided info (see section 8.2)

## Licence/Thanks

MooseZMachine is licensed under the MIT license.

Thanks to everyone who worked on the ZMachine spec. I really enjoyed working through it and implementing this.

I used ZILF to create sample zcode files for testing (http://sourceforge.net/p/zilf/_list/tickets?source=navbar)

ZTools was very helpful for debugging (http://inform-fiction.org/zmachine/ztools.html)

Commit message:

Work on refactoring to library for use with mooseterp

README.md, after:

# moosezmachine

moosezmachine is a Python 3 implementation of a Z-Machine (Z-code interpreter) based off the Z-Machine Standards Document version 1.1 (http://inform-fiction.org/zmachine/standards/z1point1/sect03.html)

moosezmachine needs at least Python 3.4 to work.

This project is a reference implementation/experimentation -- no effort has been put into optimizations. 

Currently it only handles zcode versions 1 through 3. 

For simplicity, the unicode mappings map to textual equivalents (per 3.8.5.4.1)

It is primarily designed to be used as a library for other projects (see mooseterp). You can play games using terp.py, though.

### Terp.py

NOTE: terp.py was written to help build the core interpreter. There are a wide range of better interpreters available that I would recommend using if the main goal is to play games. If you're curious about how interpreters work, though, it provides a great starting point.

To play a story file using terp.py:

python3 terp.py path_to_file

This default setup will save/load files to the /tmp directory.

Options:
* --transcript_path to indicate a transcript file AND activate the transcript in game. If this option is on a commands log will also be created, at transcript_path with ".commands" appended
* --save_path to indicate the directory to save/restore files from
# --command_path to indicate a commands source file. If provided, the contents of this file will be used as text input until the end of file is reached, then control will be returned to the player

Debugging options
# --seed to set a seed for the random number generator
# --trace to set a path to a file to dump all zcode instructions to on quit

## Architecture

The core object is the Interpreter (in zmachine.interpreter). This object acts as the virtual machine for the ZCode in the story file.

To initialize an Interpreter, you ned:
- A zmachine.interpreter.Story. This is intialized with the bytes from the the target story file 
- A zmachine.interpreter.OutputStreams object. This is initialized with zmachine.interpreter.OutputStream handlers for streams 1,2, and 4
  - Stream 1 is the normal output stream (the screen)
  - Stream 2 is the transcript stream
  - Stream 4 is a special stream that only records the player's commands
  - Stream 3 is a special memory-only stream that is not explicitly provided as a handler
- A zmachine.interpreter.InputStreams object. This is initialized with zmachine.interpreter.InputStream handlers for streams 1-2.
  - Stream 1 is the normal input stream (keyboard)
  - Stream 2 is a list of commands
- A zmachine.interpreter.SaveHandler
- A zmachine.interpreter.RestoreHandler

To initialize, call reset() on the interpreter object. This will initialize the game from the story file data, and throw an exception if the data is invalid in some way.

The interpreter does nothing on its own. To run the instruction at the current program counter, call interpreter.step(). This will run the instruction and change any internal state. 

The internal state will be one of:

- Interpreter.RUNNING_STATE: can call step to run next instruction
- Interpreter.WAITING_FOR_LINE_STATE: waiting for the next command.

If the state is WAITING_FOR_LINE_STATE, calling step() will call readline() on the interpreters InputStreams. If it returns anything but None, the intepreter will tokenize and process the command and set the state to RUNNING_STATE again.

After each step, interpreter.last_instruction will bet set to a textual description of the previous instruction for debugging purposes.

### Input

Versions of ZCode 4 and after allow for reading individual characters from the input stream. Moosezmachine sticks with verisons 3 and less and treats input as entirely modal.

An input stream needs only to implement a zero-parameter function, readline(). This should return None if no input is ready, or the input text if it has been completed.

### Output

An output stream needs to implement three functions:

- new_line: send output to the next line
- print_str(str): handle output of a string of unicode text. This may or may not have newline characterse in it.
- show_status(room_name, score_mode=True,hours=0,minutes=0, score=0,turns=0): display the status bar with the provided info (see section 8.2)

### History

Moosezmachine was originally designed to support a slack (or general bot) interface to zmachine games. I ended up dropping this as a concept for two main reasons:

1) the latency on slack was noticeable, and made playing the games somewhat frustrating
2) The screen models of v5 and up games really don't support a slack or bot style interfaces. This restricts the use case to the earlier Infocom games, and there are better ways to play them these days.

## Licence/Thanks

MooseZMachine is licensed under the MIT license.

Thanks to everyone who worked on the ZMachine spec. I really enjoyed working through it and implementing this.

I used ZILF to create sample zcode files for testing (http://sourceforge.net/p/zilf/_list/tickets?source=navbar)

ZTools was very helpful for debugging (http://inform-fiction.org/zmachine/ztools.html)
